Hello, everyone.
Welcome back to Exploring Quantum Physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
In this lecture we're going to use the
variational method to make estimates of
the properties of quantum
mechanical systems.
Now there's been a lot of material that
you've been exposed to in this course.
And I'd just like to
make one recommendation.
And that is,
if you can remember one thing,
one thing to sort of commit to memory.
Which we're going to give you some
encouragement to do so by the practice in
this part of the lecture,
it's this simple Gaussian function.
Its shape is it's
a little lump,
with a width that's proportional to d, and
it's easy to integrate.
Numerically it's a very practical
thing to use, it's easy to calculate,
and it happens to be,
here where g is just a parameter.
It has the units of length.
It expresses the characteristic
length scale of the function and
it enters the normalization
coefficient here.
You see the wave function has the units
of one over the square root of length.
And now although d is just
a parameter in this wave function,
when we interpret this as the ground
state of a harmonic oscillator.
Then d the characteristic length scale,
is the square root of h bar,
Plank's constant, divided by the mass and
the frequency of the oscillator.
So in other words,
you can use this function.
You can remember it as the ground
state of the harmonic oscillator, but
then you can use it in a very arbitrary
way to represent wave functions of
complicated systems.
So now,
we're going to do a calculation and
it's something,
we're just going to do it once.
Because when you do it once,
I'm going to give you a numonic,
I hope you can will be useful for
you to remember the result.
And that is to calculate the expectation
value of the kinetic energy
operator applied to this wave function,
which is in the one-dimensional
kinetic energy, operator mass is
bar square root 2m dx squared.
Now, this is a straightforward integral
if you just differentiate
this function twice.
But I want you to think
about how you can do it
without actually doing
explicit integral and
be able to remember how the procedure
works and to reproduce it when necessary.
And the trick is the Virial Theorem, which
you encountered in a previous homework,
and I think it was mentioned
in an earlier lecture.
And that is for the harmonic oscillator,
here's the Hamiltonian
with the usual form.
Kinetic energy and the potential
energy that's indicated there.
The Virial Theorem states that the
expectation value of the kinetic energy
over the wave function is equal to the
expectation value of the potential energy.
So these two terms make on the average
an equal contribution to the total energy.
So now I'd like you to think about what
that implies for their actual values.
So I hope that you remembered
how to get that result.
The Virial Theorem states that
the two contributions are equal.
Well then the, we must have T.
+ =E, the total energy on the average.
So in other words, the expectation
value of the kinetic energy operator
is half that of the total energy,
which is equal to,
One-half times one-half h bar
omega equal in the ground state.
Now, I want to make two comments about
this, the Virial Theorem very powerful.
So, first of all it actually applies to
any state E, the most arbitrary state
you can make of the harmonic oscillator,
including a time dependent wave packet.
Now, in that case,
this expectation value has
to be generalized,
meaning it's time averaged.
But that makes it very useful and the next
to the last point to make on this for
the moment.
It's valid in any number
of the dimensions.
So, if you have an n dimensional
harmonic oscillator,
then you can just count
the contributions to the expectation
value of the kinetic energy from
each individual coordinate.
A last comment is that virial
theorems exist for other potentials,
but this case of the harmonic oscillator
is very special when we have this so
called equipartition of energy.
Between the kinetic and potential terms,
as we'll see later, the Virial Theorem for
the cool coolum problem,
or the hydrogen atom.
Also very useful,
is an entirely different form.
So to recapitulate, if we take this
Gaussian as our trial function.
And just compute the expectations
out of the kinetic energy,
is half the total energy.
And it takes this form.
I've written it this way just to emphasize
there's a factor of a half out front,
which is due to the levothym.
And this is the ground state energy
of the harmonic oscillator but
written in terms of
the characteristic length.
So you'll see expressions of this
frequently in quantum mechanics.
H bar squared over the squared
Planck's constant divided by mass and
the square of a distance.
That's the, this is the energy
of localized function.
In other words, if you have a function
that's localized on link scale D,
then the characteristic motion,
the uncertainty principal based motion,
the average value of the kinetic energy.
Of that wave function is of the order
of h bar squared over 2md².
So if you remember
the correspondence of the Gaussian
with the harmonic oscillator ground state,
which I've just been emphasizing over and
over again in this part,
you don't have to do this interval again.
Having done it once,
you can use it forever.
And keep in mind that it always has
a contribution that goes in the inverse
square of the characteristic length scale.
That means that as you try to compress a
wave packet, you raise its kinetic energy.
It's a manifestation of
the uncertainty principle again.
So, now let's see how this
works in a simple application.
Now, in one of the homework problems for
last week,
there's a variational estimate of the
Attractive Dirac Delta function potential.
Now, I can see from responses
on the student forums.
That you know some of you have a lack of
familiarity with the direct delta function
which is fine.
Now I think there's a DLMF chapter.
A DLMF chapter.
D-L-M-F Section 1.17 for
the Dirac Delta.
I think that's very clearly and
accessibly written.
And the delta function is
the limit of a sequence.
You can think of a sequence of functions.
Let's say localized on the line.
Let's take this square well function on
the line of width a, and depth v naught.
And what you do is take
a sequence of such functions,
where a gets smaller and smaller.
And v naught gets larger and larger.
So that the product is preserved.
So, in fact, you can,
if your having trouble with the concept
of the Dirac Delta function.
Just think of it in terms of a very
specific implementation like this,
and think of this as an approximation
of the delta function.
And if we use this as the approximation
of the delta function then,
by its definition, this potential here,
is equal to -V0a delta of x.
Because as you can see, when we perform
this integral of the potential,
what we get is the only contribution is
the product V0a with the negative sign.
Over that finite interval.
Now we use the delta function, the delta
function is handy for sample applications.
But it's widely used in practice
as sort of a pseudopotential for
representing information about
complex interactions between particle.
In terms of a single parameter.
And this is useful when the de
Broglie wavelength of the system,
which is the characteristic wave length
of the quantum mechanic wave function.
That's h over p, is much,
much greater than the range,
the range of interactions
that affect the function.
Let me give you just a simple concrete
example of that before proceeding.
Here we see a schematic
representation of a wavefunction for
an ultra cold atom system,
two atoms colliding.
And here is the quantum mechanical
wavefunction for two cases of bound in
a and a free state and
then this is the intermolecular potential.
And you see in this system,
there's a lot going on in the region of
close approach of the two atoms, and many,
many, many wiggles in the wave function.
But in the application that's relevant,
the application that's important,
in the discussion of this paper,
is the behavior of the wavefunction
at large distances from the atom.
And so, really the details of
what happens in this inner region
are only important insofar as it
affects the long range functionality
behavior of the wave function out here.
And so that behavior can be built
in by the use of a Delta function
in an internal region that
just sets the scale for
the evolution of the wave
function further out.
So lets go and complete the problem.
We're going to calculate the expectation
value of age as a function of d.
Using our trial function.
Okay, so we have,
we have this expression for
the kinetic energy,
it's h bar squared over 2m b squared.
So and
now let's just recall what it must be for
the contribution for the potential energy.
Well all we need to do there.
Is when we integrate over the delta
function we just get minus v0a
Times psi squared evaluated x equals 0.
Right?
Because that, the delta function,
this takes a measure of the weight
on top of it at the origin.
And so psi squared x equal to zero,
is just d over the square root of pi.
So this gives us,
at small d a very repulsive,
in fact let's just plot
it out schematically.
This would be T.
Now let me see if I can
change the color here.
Yeah so now what about V?
Well, V is minus one over D.
So that is negative here, and
it falls off inversely
proportional to the potential.
So this is v.
So now let's look at the sum of the two.
So the sum of the two,
it's positive at short distances,
but then it's got to become negative
at long distances so it turns over.
And so this,
this defines a point of minimum.
So you just have to find
the minimum as a function of d,
find the minimum value of this,
the sum of these two terms.
And that gives you the best
choice of the scale parameter.
To estimate the energy of
the attractive delta function.
I want like to say that this
is the same minimization
that one encounters for
the hydrogen atom in three dimensions.
That is first of all, obviously,
the kinetic energy, the contribution of
the kinetic energy is always the same.
And then if you think of it,
well the hydrogen atom has you
know v of r goes as 1 over r.
So it stands to reason that you'd have
an inverse length in the expectation value
for the potential energy.
And we'll see in the subsequent
part that that's the case.